---
layout: post
title: "Week 1, Day 1"
date: 2014-10-25T03:54:15-07:00
tags: game-a-week, game-dev, SDL, week-1
---

Getting started on this week's game on Friday night... The first week was already going to be a little funky
because I'd need to get a few pre-requisite things done:

 * Decide on a framework and language
 * Get __an__ app built with said framework and language
 * Try to templatize that app a little to make starting fresh each week easier

The first few weeks are going to have a lot more engine development than later weeks as well, since I will
be starting from scratch (aside from what [SDL][sdl] gives me, that is) in that regard. So I'm thinking the
first week is actually going to end up being 1.5 weeks.

Tonight (and well into the wee hours of the morning) I did a bit of research and eliminated the [go-lang][go] option
as it still can't be built to iOS as far as I can tell. I've settled on SDL for sure, and got a templatizable
Xcode project started which is building to the Simulator. I found [this video][sdl-ios-video] quite helpful
in that endeavor.

Tomorrow I'll need to do a bit more reading about doing Lua bindings, and experiment a bit with that and think
about how/if I want to design the engine with respect to that. I'd really much rather be writing game logic
in Lua than C++ for a myriad of reasons not the least of which being that Lua is just so much easier to write
quickly. Engine work will probably still be in C++ (or even C, for that matter), but I want to spend time really
thinking about the separation of concerns and where it makes sense to do the binding between the two.

Do you have any opinions or thoughts on the matter? [Email](mailto:ryan@ryanarana.com?subject=Game a Week) me! Or
<a class="twitter-mention-button" href="https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?screen_name=aranasaurus&count=none">
tweet at me!
</a>
<script type="text/javascript">
window.twttr=(function(d,s,id){var t,js,fjs=d.getElementsByTagName(s)[0];if(d.getElementById(id)){return}js=d.createElement(s);js.id=id;js.src="https://platform.twitter.com/widgets.js";fjs.parentNode.insertBefore(js,fjs);return window.twttr||(t={_e:[],ready:function(f){t._e.push(f)}})}(document,"script","twitter-wjs"));
</script>

[sdl]: http://libsdl.org "SDL2"
[go]: http://golang.org "Go"
[sdl-ios-video]: http://www.ciaranmccormack.com/sdl-2-0-on-ios-using-xcode-opengl-es-2-0-and-c-11/ "SDL 2 on iOS - Ciaran McCormack"

